---
title: "[MLP-00] Machine Learning: Getting Started"
date:  2023-09-27 21:37:00 +0200
categories: [Practical Programming, Python]
tags: [practical programming, machine learning, python]
pin: true
math: true
---

If you're just starting your journey into the world of Machine Learning and wondering when and where to begin, let me simplify it for you. The "when" is easy – it's *now*. As for the "where," I've got a suggestion that worked wonders for me.

Back in February 2020, I embarked on my Machine Learning adventure by enrolling in a self-paced course on Udemy called [Machine Learning A-Z](https://www.udemy.com/course/machinelearning/) by Kiril Eremenko and HJadelin de Pontsves. Let me tell you, it was a game-changer. This course was not only helpful but also incredibly interesting.

Here's why I recommend it:
- **Ease of Understanding:** The course breaks down complex concepts into simple, digestible chunks. Whether you're a beginner or have some prior knowledge, it's designed to accommodate everyone.

- **Theory Meets Practice:** It strikes the perfect balance between theory and hands-on coding. You'll grasp the foundational concepts and immediately put them into practice. Oh, you'll get tons of codes and resources too!

- **Budget-Friendly:** I got access to all this knowledge for just $14.9 USD. That's less than what you'd spend on a meal at your favorite restaurant.

- **Learn at Your Pace:** The self-paced nature of the course allows you to learn when it suits you best. No rush, no pressure.

So, what's my plan now? I'll be sharing the valuable insights and knowledge I gained from that course right here. Think of it as your roadmap to building a solid foundation in machine learning. We'll keep it simple, no jargon or complex equations, I promise! 😉

Stay tuned for more updates and let's embark on this machine learning journey together! 🚀
